Initial proposal for artifacts (#71781)
dotnet/roslyn: docs/features/non-source-outputs.md

# Artifact Outputs for Incremental Generators

## Summary

> This proposal adds a mechanism that allows [incremental generators](incremental-generators.md) to output non-source artifacts, that is, text or binary files that are emitted to disk alongside the compiled assembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal adds a mechanism that allows [incremental generators](incremental-generators.md) to output non-source artifacts. This would allow for text or binary files to be emitted to disk alongside the compiled assembly.
```

### Rationale

> There exists a desire for incremental source generators be able to write out a set of accompanying files, alongside the generated sources that they add to the compilation. An example of this is JavaScript interop with .NET code. When exposing a .NET method to JavaScript today it is possible to generate the C# interop source code that enables the call to be made from JavaScript, but the user must still hand author the corresponding JavaScript code. Instead, with this feature the incremental generator could emit both the required C# code alongside a JavaScript file that provides the equivalent JavaScript interop code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There exists a desire for incremental source generators be able to write out a set of accompanying files, alongside the generated sources that they add to the compilation. An example of this is JavaScript interop with .NET code. When exposing a .NET method to JavaScript today it is possible to generate the C# interop source code that enables the call to be made from JavaScript, but the user must still hand author the corresponding JavaScript code. Instead, the incremental generator could emit the required C# code alongside a JavaScript file that provides the equivalent JavaScript interop code.
```

### High Level Design Goals

> - Allow Incremental Generators to emit source or binary files to disk alongside the emitted .NET assembly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow Incremental Generators to emit source or text or binary files to disk alongside the emitted .NET assembly
```

> - The user can control where the generated artifacts are emitted with a suitable default

Author: I think this depends on if we allow the generator to write the file or if we have MSBuild do the moving. If we're going to allow the generator to write the file, then we should definitely guard rail it somewhat. If we do it via MSBuild then I think it's just a case of wherever the property is set to.

> - The user can control where the generated artifacts are emitted with a suitable default

Reviewer: including absolute vs relative positioning?

Reviewer 2: I worry about this point. There are two main scenarios for artifact writing that I have in my head: 

1. The `wwwroot` case. Essentially, the generator author knows exactly where in the file system that they want to drop a file.
2. The _use later in build_ case. The generator author wants to put a file on disk that they'll consume later on in the build process. Or make available for other people to consume. 

The problem with customization for (1) is that it breaks the generator entirely. Somehow have to prevent output customizations from impacting this case else we open the door for breaking generator. 

The problem with (2) is that this customization needs to be communicated in our build output. Basically I imagine I'm writing code that is trying to find the output here. Once user customization gets into the mix somehow that has to be communicated out. Trying to imagine the best way for that. Sending out the full list of artifacts even seems hard cause how do I find artifacts from a particular generator?

Reviewer 3: > Sending out the full list of artifacts even seems hard cause how do I find artifacts from a particular generator?

I recall we previously discussed generators being able to pre-define their outputs via MSBuild as a way to inform the rest of the system? For all the scenarios I'm aware of, the set of generated files is finite and will need to land in a well-defined directory so it feels like it's constrained enough to support pre-defining?

Author: @captainsafia This is interesting to me, how would you know what the outputs are going to be? Could you expand a little on the scenario you're looking at using this for?

- Be optimal in terms of file writes / copies and ensure we keep the correct incremental build semantics for MSBuild

> - Do not have to be run as part of the IDE experience. Files are only emitted to disk as part of command line compilation

Reviewer 3: For the scenario I'm interested in (outputting OpenAPI files) there is a desire to produce the files as part of the IDE experience so they can integrate into things like VS's API Explorer. Is the primary concern here around perf?

Author: Yes, allowing arbitrary writes to the disk during IDE will be a horrible perf cliff, I don't think there is any way we could do it efficiently.

That being said, I wonder if we could enable it to run at least to the point of providing a filename. That way we could (in theory) allow the IDE to list the artifacts being produced and potentially run the generator for that artifact if the user wants to view it?

## Implementation

The feature is exposed to incremental generator authors via a new output API:

```csharp
namespace Microsoft.CodeAnalysis;

public readonly partial struct IncrementalGeneratorInitializationContext
{
    public void RegisterArtifactOutput<TSource>(IncrementalValueProvider<TSource> source, Action<ArtifactProductionContext, TSource> action);
    public void RegisterArtifactOutput<TSource>(IncrementalValuesProvider<TSource> source, Action<ArtifactProductionContext, TSource> action);
}

public readonly struct ArtifactProductionContext
{

>     public CancellationToken CancellationToken { get; }

Reviewer 2: Why did you choose to put the `CancellationToken` here as a property vs. feeding it through the `callback` delegate? The latter would've been my first instinct.

Author: It just matches the shape we already have for the existing contexts. We could also feed it through into the `callback` delegate so you don't have to capture the context.

    public void AddFile(string hintName, Action<System.IO.Stream, CancellationToken> callback);
}
```

This can be used by a generator author like so:

```csharp
internal sealed class Generator : IIncrementalGenerator
{
    public void Initialize(IncrementalGeneratorInitializationContext context)
    {
        var compilationSource = context.CompilationProvider;

>         context.RegisterArtifactOutput(compilationSource, (nspc, item) =>

Reviewer: can we change nspc to something reasonable.  i genuinely have no idea what i tmeans.

        {

>             nspc.AddFile("interop.js", (stream) =>

Author: This should probably be `AddArtifact`

>             nspc.AddFile("interop.js", (stream, cancellationToken) =>

Reviewer: if you always get a stream, i would remove all mention of text/binary from everything above.  We can simply call out at some point that if you want text, you just wrap the stream in a writer, just like any normal .net program would.

>             nspc.AddFile("interop.js", (stream, cancellationToken) =>

Reviewer: AddFile seems wrong.  can we say AddArtifact?

Reviewer 2: See bottom of doc, there is an open issue section about naming.

            {
                using var writer = new StreamWriter(stream);

>                 writer.WriteLine("//output");

Reviewer 2: The problem with having `CancellationToken` be on the `ArtifactProductionContext` is that accessing it here, which seems natural as you'd pass it to the `Stream` APIs, requires a closure and an allocation.

            });
        });
    }
}
```

> Note how the call to `AddFile` takes a callback that provides a stream. This allows the host of the generator driver to control how the stream is created and what kind of stream is created. For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk, but in unit tests it could be a `MemoryStream` that can be inspected as part of the test. It also takes a `hintName`, the same way that source files do, rather than an explicit file name or path. This is explained in more detail below.

Author: Hmm, this is an interesting point. I had assumed we would just write the file essentially at the point that it's called in the generator, but I agree that we probably shouldn't be stamping on stuff in the case of a failed build. 

We could certainly hold onto the callback and not invoke it until the point we're actually ready to write it. That brings up some possible weirdness around closures and lifetimes of things in the generator, although in theory it should only be the item passed into the outer `AddArtifactOutput` which is coming from a state table and thus hanging around anyway.

Then there is the alternative take which says, oh, maybe we should just be writing into the `obj` directory and copying upon success.

> Note how the call to `AddFile` takes a callback that provides a stream. This allows the host of the generator driver to control how the stream is created and what kind of stream is created. For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk, but in unit tests it could be a `MemoryStream` that can be inspected as part of the test. It also takes a `hintName`, the same way that source files do, rather than an explicit file name or path. This is explained in more detail below.

Author: Hmm, actually the `obj` thing is interesting to me, because we could still combine it with the idea of `<CompilerArtifactMapping` but we'd just write all the files into dedicated `obj` directories and have the compiler targets do the copying based on the mappings. 

That's actually much simpler, achieves the same thing from a user and author pov. The only downside is the extra copy that isn't present by writing it directly. We'd also need a lot less  compiler infrastructure as we'd just write it to the existing `generatedFilesOut` directory with a dedicated artifacts subfolder.

> Note how the call to `AddFile` takes a callback that provides a stream. This allows the host of the generator driver to control how the stream is created and what kind of stream is created. For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk, but in unit tests it could be a `MemoryStream` that can be inspected as part of the test. It also takes a `hintName`, the same way that source files do, rather than an explicit file name or path. This is explained in more detail below.

Author: If we combined the allowing of subfolders too, then the folder could stand in for the 'virtual' folder name. You could imagine the mapping actually being something like

Copy all artifacts and subfolders to a specific folder:
`<CompilerArtifactMapping Include="GeneratorName" OutputDir="$(MSBuildProjectRoot)\wwwroot" />`

Copy specific parts to other places
```
<CompilerArtifactMapping Include="GeneratorName" SourceDir="js" OutputDir="$(MSBuildProjectRoot)\wwwroot\js" />
<CompilerArtifactMapping Include="GeneratorName" SourceDir="js\interop" OutputDir="$(MSBuildProjectRoot)\wwwroot\specialInteropStuff" />
```

> Note how the call to `AddFile` takes a callback that provides a stream. This allows the host of the generator driver to control how the stream is created and what kind of stream is created. For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk, but in unit tests it could be a `MemoryStream` that can be inspected as part of the test. It also takes a `hintName`, the same way that source files do, rather than an explicit file name or path. This is explained in more detail below.

Reviewer 2: > I had assumed we would just write the file essentially at the point that it's called in the generator, but I agree that we probably shouldn't be stamping on stuff in the case of a failed build.

If we move to the model of being able to see other generators output then this becomes maybe a bit easier. That could be structured to run after core compile completes so by then we know that compilation succeeded.

> Note how the call to `AddFile` takes a callback that provides a stream. This allows the host of the generator driver to control how the stream is created and what kind of stream is created. For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk, but in unit tests it could be a `MemoryStream` that can be inspected as part of the test. It also takes a `hintName`, the same way that source files do, rather than an explicit file name or path. This is explained in more detail below.

Reviewer: > For instance in the compiler it could be a `FileStream` that writes directly to disk

I don't love this.  Especially as it now opens up gnerator code to concepts like IO exceptions.  I think we should buffer, and write out and own that entire painful space.  Or we should ensure that however we wrap, we deal with the exceptinos. 

Note: testing around exceptions should be done here.

Reviewer 2: This was a trouble spot for Roslyn in our first few releases. While reading the doc I paged back in the code cause my mental model is that this should mostly follow how we write our PE, PDB, etc ... files to disk. 

Indeed we do absolutely use `FileStream` as the implementation. That does mean IO exceptions are a very real problem and it's one the compiler put a lot of work into handling.

Author: I would assume that the compiler would handle the exceptions, in the same way we handle exceptions today in the generator driver. We wrap the callbacks, catch, and turn them into generator errors, not raw exceptions.

In order to control whether this output is used or not, a new entry is added to the `IncrementalGeneratorOutputKind` enum:

```diff
[Flags]
public enum IncrementalGeneratorOutputKind
{
    None = 0,
    Source = 0b1,
    PostInit = 0b10,
+    Artifact = 0b100
}
```

A host such as the IDE may disable non-source outputs when constructing the Generator Driver.

> In terms of the compilation and inputs that an Artifact can be based on, artifact outputs are treated the same as source outputs; all generation is based on the state of the compilation *before* any other generation has happened, and an artifact can't use the output of another generator (outside of itself) to generate artifacts.

Reviewer: this, to me, seems incredibly odd.

1. we have already said that this is not c# code, so it doesn't influence the compiler.
2. the use cases we're presented (like emitting a js interop api) would need to be generating against the *final* compilation.  So this seems like it's kneecapped unnecessarily from the start.

I would think we could be *very* different here.  These run on the final compilation, producing *final* artifacts for tools after the csc step.

Author: If we go that route then I think we have to create a 'new' kind of generator, that only produces artifacts, not add it to incremental generators. Allowing artifacts to see the output compilation would require us to re-run parts of the graph in a second pass.

Its technically feasible; we would just run fork the driver and run it a second time only for these outputs, it's just extremely confusing to explain to authors that some code runs at one time, some runs at another, and any shared parts are run twice with different inputs. 

Given that incremental generators already confuse authors, making it more obscure seems bad. If we really care about running after everything is generated I think we should make these a new thing.

Reviewer: > it's just extremely confusing to explain to authors that some code runs at one time

To me, i think it's reasonable to explain it in the following fashion:

We start with compiler inputs.
We run the generator steps to add post init files.
We get the initial compilation.
We run the normal generators to produce *c# code*.
We get the final compilation.
We run analyzers and artifact-generation on the final-compilation. 

The only one that is special is the middle one, since it needs to do some amount of analysis that feeds back into the project.

--

I guess put another way: i don't see how this could work (say for the js cases we're using as examples) if they don't see generated code.  if you're trying to spit out a js-api... what do you do for things like the APIs generated by things like the JsonGenerator, etc.?

Author: Hmm, that's true that we do it for post init already so there is precedence.

I guess I am coming at it from the point of view that you already have a source generator, it makes some C# stuff; it also wants to make some non-C# stuff to go along with it. As opposed to, I have a new generator that wants to make non-C# stuff.

FWIW The asp.net scenarios (and I also discovered today, Gladstone) do work in this model. There are possibly generators that don't, but I don't have concrete examples yet.

Reviewer 4: +1 for artifact generation on final compilation. When running in the IDE, would we even run this step? I would think we can skip it entirely.

### File names and output locations

The call to `AddFile` takes a `hintName` for the output file rather than an explicit file name or path. This allows the host of the generator driver the freedom to decide where precisely the file should go (if it is indeed going to e.g. the disk). Here we propose a set of rules that the command line compiler will follow. Other hosts may choose a different scheme.

> The compiler will take a new command line option `/generatedartifactsout:` that will specify the _default_ location of any generated artifacts. By default, using the compiler MSBuild targets, this will be set to the `$(OutDir)` property (i.e. `/bin/`). Note that this is different to `OutputAssembly` and `GeneratedFilesOutputPath` which typically use the `$(IntermediateOutputPath)` (i.e. `/obj/`). This ensures that artifacts are written to their final location a single time, rather than being written to an intermediate directory and having to be copied, optimizing the disk usage.

Author: `/bin/` is actually `/bin/<targetFramework>/`

> By default the supplied `hintName` will be used as the filename. We already have conditions in place for source texts to prevent hint names from being invalid filenames, and we will reuse this logic for artifact names. If two generators attempt to write a file with the same name, the generator name, including namespace, will be prepended to the name of the files to ensure there are no conflicts.

Author: The conflict thing is interesting, because practically we won't know about a collision until the second generator tries to write to the file. We _could_ go back and rename the originally produced file, or more likely only rename the second copy meaning which ever generator gets there first wins. We might consider issuing a warning at the same time.

Reviewer: 1. writing to a disparate location than the name asked for seems like asking for trouble (esp. if non-deterministic).
2. it feels like we can be deterministic here by running the generators up through the AddFile step, thus knowing the names of the things they want to generate.   we could then generate the final names just fine.  we can then actually invoke the writing step after that point.

### Customizing output locations

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Author: I see two options to the multi output case:

- We allow subdirectories in the output paths, and you set the generator directory to eg. `wwwroot` and then write to `/js/file.js` and `/css/file.css` 
- We could do a variation of the individual artifact idea and allow generators to specify named folders. You could imagine ASP.Net having a couple of 'named outputs', like `GeneratedJS` `GeneratedCSS` etc, and allow the user to set the locations of those. 
  - As always discovery is an issue, but I could totally imagine them shipping their own properties in the SDK that map down to a `<CompilerArtifactMapping` to make it more ergonomic.

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Author: For simplicity's sake I'm leaning towards the first option, but I actually quite like the second option.

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Reviewer 2: But why does a generator author need a .globalconfig for this? It seems complicated to keep those in sync. Further it adds more work to the compiler to find ad consume these packages. If we go with the sub directory approach what is to stop customers from just saying "my root dir is c:\" and now they effecitvely get full path support?

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Author: `.globalconfig` is just a transport mechanism really. I would expect authors (and users) to be writing the mapping in MSBuild code, and letting the task we have already route it thru the config. It's already supported to ship a props or targets file with a generator that nuget auto picks up, so it actually works nicely. 

> If we go with the sub directory approach what is to stop customers from just saying "my root dir is c:" and now they effecitvely get full path support?

There isn't? If thats what a customer wants to do, its up to them. But they chose to give the generator full access to their drive, it wasn't forced on them.

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Reviewer 5: I think the output location for these files should be file specific. I do not see how that happens without it being in AddFile.

What if an ASP.NET generator creates some source files, some .js files, some startup configuration files, and something else. They will not all go to wwwroot.

It does seem like we could do that via copy from obj if we go that route, but I kind of hate asking folks for _more_ MSBuild logic.

> While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`). This proposal provides a mechanism to override the location of artifacts in two ways: on a per-generator basis, and on an individual artifact basis. Both of these mechanisms are implemented via `.globalconfig` options, and exposed with `MSBuild` properties to enable easy configuration by both Generator authors and consumers.

Reviewer: > While it may be acceptable for the majority of cases to simply place the artifacts in the bin directory, there are known cases (such as the Javascript interop case mentioned at the beginning) where it would be beneficial to place generated files in a more specific location (such as `wwwroot`).

fwiw, this feels entirely like teh job of a build/make system.  I would not ever expect a compiler tool to do this.

Author: I mention this above in a comment, but I basically agree with you. At the same time there is a desire to minimize disk writes etc. which requires the compiler to try and optimize the writes. 

My gut says we should just write to obj, let MSBuild do the moving, but have the csharp targets 'own' that job. If we decide the perf isn't good enough, we can always move it into the compiler directly later on without needing to change anything.

Reviewer 4: +1 for not trying to optimize this at compiler level. I don't see why we would treat today's compiler outputs that go to obj dir (.dll, .xml, .pdb) and artifacts produces by source generators differently.

Reviewer 2: Optimization is one facet, the other facet is making generators easy to author. Consider a design where we only allow outputting to `obj`. Now generators like the one asp.net want to write must ship both a generator and msbuild targets file in their NuPkg. The msbuild targets are necessary to copy the output of the generator to the correct location in wwwroot. That seems very wrong given at the time the generator creates the files they very much know where on disk where the file needs to go. 

Why would we make them go through the trouble of writing, maintaining and shipping .targets files vs. put the file in the final location? We're complicating the generation here and adding MSBuild execution (slower builds) that doesn't need to happen. 

Part of the reason generators exist is to allow developers to stop writing msbuild code in the pipeline.

The generator driver will recognize the following `.globalconfig` options:

- `compiler_artifact.<generatorname>.outputdir = <dir>`

> - `compiler_artifact.<artifactname>.outputdir = <dir>`

Author: I mention this in the open questions, but the more I've thought about it the more I think we should only do per-generator redirection, not per-artifact. If a user really wants to move an individual artifact, they have to know its name in advance anyway so can just use a post-compilation MSBuild step to acheive the same thing.

Reviewer: what is the format of generatorname/artifactname?  do you have examples of this?

Author: Would be the same as we use today for emitted source files. 

An example from razor is:

`obj\Debug\net6.0\generated\Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Razor.SourceGenerators\Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Razor.SourceGenerators.RazorSourceGenerator\App_razor.g.cs`

Which is `<assemblyName>\<generatorName>\<artifactName>`

> - `compiler_artifact.<artifactname>.output_dir = <dir>`

Reviewer 5: This feels really disconnected. What do we gain by the .globalconfig route? 

Lots of ways to go wrong - typos, assuming a default is in use when an entry exists, changing an artifact name and missing the update to this file...

I think folks are more likely to think "here's my file content, the desired name, and where it will go"

While these properties can be set manually in a `.globalconfig` it's expected that they will instead be passed from `MSBuild` as project items. The compiler already has a mechanism via `.MSBuildGeneratedEditorConfig` that allows the mapping of `MSBuild` information into `.globalconfig` format, and this proposal expands on that to support the compiler artifact mapping. The mapping will recognize the `<CompilerArtifactMapping` item, and will map the `include` value into the key name and the `Location` attribute as the key value (`<dir>`)

```xml
<ItemGroup>
    <!-- Map all of the outputs of the razor source generator -->
    <CompilerArtifactMapping Include="Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.Razor.SourceGenerators.SourceGenerator" Location="$(OutDir)\Razor" />

    <!-- Map an individual artifact -->
    <CompilerArtifactMapping Include="ArtifactName" Location="c:\dir" />
<ItemGroup>
```

Would produce the following in the generated editor config:

```ini
compiler_artifact.Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.Razor.SourceGenerators.SourceGenerator.outputdir = bin\net8.0\Razor

> compiler_artifact.ArtifactName.outputdir = c:\dir

Reviewer: why compiler_artifact, but not output_dir?  the difference in naming is tweaking me.

```

This means that generator authors are free to specify a mapping alongside their generator via the standard `NuGet` props and targets mechanism, and consumers of the generators are able to override the location in a consistent way.

## MSBuild semantics

> Today, it's not possible to dynamically provide the list of outputs to an `MSBuild` target. This proposal allows the compiler to effectively emit an unbound number of files, none of which are tracked via `MSBuild` meaning that incremental compilation can be broken. (Note this is actually true today thanks to `EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles` but they don't have a bearing on the correctness of build).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today, it's not possible to dynamically provide the list of outputs to an `MSBuild` target. This proposal allows the compiler to effectively emit an unbound number of files, none of which are tracked via `MSBuild` meaning that incremental compilation can be broken. (Note this is actually true today thanks to `EmitCompilerGeneratedFiles` but they don't have a bearing on the correctness of build as they are not inputs to any other task or target).
```

> In order to correctly participate in the build process the compiler and targets are updated to emit a new file with the list of all files that it wrote as part of a compilation. A new target is added before `CoreCompile` that runs unconditionally and looks for the existence of the output list file; if the list is present and anything in the list is missing or out of date, the target touches a 'sentinel file'. The 'sentinel' file is passed as an input to `CoreCompile`. This ensures that anytime an output from the compiler is modified outside of the compilation process, `CoreCompile` will be correctly invoked and not skipped as being up to date. The 'sentinel' file effectively stands in for all of the outputs produced by the compiler in the `MSBuild` up to date checks.

Reviewer 2: Think we should detail name of file and where it lives on disk. Assume it's in `obj` next to the outputted PE.

In order to decide if a file is modified the new target will require a task that can decide if a file has been modified since the previous build. This logic is fairly simple, as it just has to compare the timestamp of the output list file with the items listed within, but it's worth calling out that this does duplicate some of the `MSBuild` logic in the compiler tasks. The concept of dynamic inputs/outputs is proposed by `MSBuild` but not currently implemented. If this feature is added we could remove this duplication.

## Open Questions

> - Naming: This proposal originally used the term `NonSource` but that's not particularly descriptive and perhaps odd in that it's not actually the mirror of a source output in that it's not going into the compilation. `Artifact` seems like a better term? Or simply `File`?

Reviewer 2: You're right that `NonSource` doesn't really run off the tongue. I'm ambivalent between `File` and `Artifact`. The Roslyn API tends to use `File` here (`SourceFile`, `AdditionalFile`, etc ...) so I'd lean towards that but I don't feel strongly about this.

Reviewer 5: AdditionalOutputFile is consistent and clear, if long.

- Do we want custom mapping for the `compiler_artifact.` scheme, or could we just use the existing `build_metadata.<ItemType>.<Metadata>` mechanism and recognize `CompilerMappedArtifact` as a special key?
  - This is doable, but does tie the MSBuild item type name directly into the compiler, rather than having a level of indirection.

> - File mapping: should we just let the generators party on the file system and allow absolute paths and `.`, `..` etc, rather than having the host control the output location?

Reviewer 2: I feel like this is the route that we should be going. Effectively the `AddFile` API should allow for relative or full paths. In the case of relative it's treated like hint source today and emitted in the generator specific directory. If it's a full path then it's just emitted where the path says. 

As you note that does raise the problem of how do generators get information about the project layout. Think we can help them by essentially auto-feeding the project file path into analyzers options. That way there is a point of reference they can use.

This is a bit of a side bar but I've long wondered if there are a few common / important MSBuild properties that we should feed through to analyzer config. Analyzers want to see items like `<TargetFramework>` and having them all feed it through feels like wasted effort. Or worse watching them [parse it out of metadata][1]. This seems like anotherc case where we could solve a few problems by having a well known set of porperties that we auto-feed through analyzer config options. 

[1]: https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn-analyzers/pull/7116

Author: I guess allowing the generators to write absolute paths or whatever makes me *really* nervous from an escape hatch point of view. If a generator is writing the wrong place, or I have some weird build setup where I do things post-build, it's painful if I have no control over where the artifacts are going.

I guess it seems weird that everything else the compiler outputs is controllable, but suddenly there is a whole set of stuff that is effectively hard coded by the compiler.

Reviewer 2: > If a generator is writing the wrong place, or I have some weird build setup ...

What is the difference though between writing to the wrong place and copying to the wrong place? Both designs allow for the generator author to, at least initially, control where they write files. Mistake can happen in either place. I'd argue mistakes are more likely to happen when we abstract it such that success means combining locations from different sources like .globalconfig, source code and msbuild mappings. 
 
> where I do things post-build, it's painful if I have no control over where the artifacts are going.

For some generators, like `wwworoot`, giving control effectively breaks the generator. Using it is an understanding that it's going to put the files where it wants. I'm not sure what it would mean to give users control over where generators like this emit output. 

For the _emit to disk and use it later in build_ case I can see that customization is more desirable. But if the default location for such artifacts is under `obj` and users can already control `obj` location ... what is the value in more customization? Definitely get the value in customizing `obj` (done it many many times) but customizing within `obj` i can't see a good use case for (am I missing an important one?). I also worry about the more customizations we add the more ways users can make their builds complex and hard to understand by tooling. So I'm wary of striking the right balance.

Author: I think the difference between the path being in MSBuild and the path being in the generator itself, it that as a user I can always override the MSBuild logic. It has natural, understood extension points and ways to overwrite values. If it's in the generator I have zero control, other than removing the generator altogether.

Reviewer 2: What is the value in overriding a generator that can only output correctly to one place?

Reviewer 5: > This is a bit of a side bar but I've long wondered if there are a few common / important MSBuild properties that we should feed through to analyzer config. Analyzers want to see items like `<TargetFramework>` and having them all feed it through feels like wasted effort. Or worse watching them [parse it out of metadata](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn-analyzers/pull/7116). This seems like anotherc case where we could solve a few problems by having a well known set of porperties that we auto-feed through analyzer config options.

I like this.

Reviewer 5: I get that _you_ want that control. But for the majority of our users MSBuld is a scary place and they are just going to use the default from the generator author. I would like to see some examples of why the user would override the generator author. I feel like the generator author is probably writing code that accesses the artifact, but maybe I am missing some use cases.

Author: I guess my biggest worry is that if you allow the generator to decide the output path then you're hard coding layout assumptions into the generator itself. Sure `wwwroot\js` might be the right place for the files today, but what if tomorrow Blazor turns around and moves that directory?

>   - An issue with this approach is that a user can control their project layout via MSBuild, and the generator won't know that it has changed, meaning you might end up with files in odd places

Reviewer 5: As in - files the user thinks were generated that are ignored. :(

  - It would be possible to route though e.g. `OutDir` either automatically, or by the generator author specifying it as a `CompilerVisibleProperty` but this relies on the author doing the correct thing (and multiple authors having to copy the same logic)
  - It seems better to write to a 'virtual' location, and let the host re-direct that as appropriate.
- File mapping: within a hint name should we allow sub-directories? So that a given generator can write to e.g. `<base>/css` and `<base>/js` and just map the `<base>` directory to wherever is appropriate?
- File mapping: can we just have the compiler write them to the obj directory (or the `GeneratedFilesOut` directory) and use MSBuild to do the copying? Either by default or require the author to supply targets to do the copying after build?
  - This makes things for the compiler simpler, but doesn't optimize for disk hits or consistency. A given generator may not even _know_ what its outputs are going to be ahead of time, as the artifact name may be derived from a user input, making it almost impossible for the generator to provide the copy

>     - We could say that each generators outputs go to a specific folder, like the generated files do, so that it could just copy `<dir>/*` to the location that matters.

Author: This still requires authors to ship extra MSBuild logic for the copying which seems undesirable.

> - File mapping: do we really need the ability to map individual artifacts? Maybe per-generator is enough, and a user can always write `MSBuild` logic to move the individual artifacts if required?

Reviewer 5: I think I already mentioned this, but I think you need individual artifact control, or the author has to write a separate generator, and likely repeat work evaluating the inputs, just to put an artifact in a different place.

Author: This to me actually pushes it back to making it MSBuild based. The generator can emit the files via whatever scheme it wants (filetype, folders, naming convention) and the generators MSBuild can then move them wherever they want.

> - User control: do we need a way for the user to disable artifact production? Should this be per generator or just all artifacts?

Author: Thinking more, I think this is definitely needed.

Reviewer 2: What scenarios do you think this is needed for? 

The one that popped to mind for me was WPF temporary assemblies. Having artifact production there is not desired.

Author: Yeah, or just users doing weird stuff with builds, which they very much do :) I worry about not having an escape hatch at all. Could be as simple as we don't emit unless the output path is passed to the compiler (that's what we do with the source files too). So, by default, it always is on, but you can disable it via MSBuild trivially for whatever reason you have.
